# Arvada

A tool to infer grammars from an example set and a correctness oracle, that can be used for both generation and parsing tasks.

To reference Arvada in your research, we request you to cite our ASE'21 paper:
> Neil Kulkarni*, Caroline Lemieux*, and Koushik Sen. 2021. Learning Highly Recursive Grammars. In Proceedings of the 36th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Automated Software Engineering (ASE'21).

## Artifact for Replication

We provide a docker container that contains replication instructions for the experiments from the technical research paper describing Arvada, Learning Highly Recursive Input Grammars, ASE'21. The container is available from [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/r/carolemieux/arvada-artifact), or you can pull it via command-line:
```
$ docker pull carolemieux/arvada-artifact:latest
```
The README in the docker container describes the structure of the benchmarks, how to use the run scripts, and the expected time to replicate the experiments.

## Building

Requires python3 to run. Install the following two packages via pip to make sure everything runs:
```
$ pip3 install lark-parser
$ pip3 install tqdm
```

## Running Arvada

Suppose you have a directory containing a set of examples, `TRAIN_DIR`, and an oracle for a valid example, `ORACLE_CMD`. The restrictions on `ORACLE_CMD` are as follows:

- `ORACLE_CMD filename` should run the oracle on the file with name `filename`
- `ORACLE_CMD filename` should return 0 if the example in `filename` is valid, and an exit code greater than 0 if it is invalid. 

You can then run Arvada via:
```
$ python3 search.py external ORACLE_CMD TRAIN_DIR LOG_FILE
```
this will store the learned grammar as a pickled dictionary in `LOG_FILE.gramdict`, and some information about training in `LOG_FILE`.

If you also have a held-out test set in `TEST_DIR`, you can evaluate the precision and recall of the mined grammar with the utility `eval.py`. This utility also handily prints out the unpickled grammar. The provided `LOG_FILE` must match one generated by search.py, as this utility looks for `LOG_FILE.gramdict`. 
```
$ python3 eval.py external [-n PRECISION_SET_SIZE] ORACLE_CMD TEST_DIR LOG_FILE
```
The optional `PRECISION_SET_SIZE` argument specifies how many inputs to sample from the mined grammar to evaluate precision. It is 1000 by default.

Of course, if you do not have a held-out test set, you can still evaluate the precision of the mined grammar by using your training directory as test:
```
$ python3 eval.py external [-n PRECISION_SET_SIZE] ORACLE_CMD TRAIN_DIR LOG_FILE
```
The Recall should be 1.0 in this case.


## Minimal working example

The directory `bc-example` contains a minimal example of learning a calculator language from a set of example and the correctness oracle as the `bc` program running without syntax errors.

First ensure that [`bc`](https://www.gnu.org/software/bc/manual/html_mono/bc.html) is installed; it should come standard on most linux distributions. If everything works fine, the following command should run without error:
```
$ ./bc-example/bc-wrapper.sh bc-example/train_set/guide-0.ex
```

You can learn a grammar from the oracle `./bc-example/bc-wrapper` and the provided examples in `bc-example/train_set` as follows:
```
$ python3 search.py external .bc-example/bc-wrapper.sh bc-example/train_set bc-example.log
```
(this took around 20 seconds on our machine)

The grammar is stored as a pickled object in `bc-example.log.gramdict`. The `eval.py` utility will print out the grammar in `bc-example.log.eval` after running: 
```
$ python3 search.py external .bc-example/bc-wrapper.sh bc-example/test_set bc-example.log 100
```

Over 5 runs, we witnessed 4 runs with 1.0 Recall and 1.0 Precision, and 1 run with 0.95 Recall and 1.0 Precision.

### Pretokenization

By default, Arvada pretokenizes its inputs --- grouping together sequences of (a) lowercase characters, (b) uppercase characters, (c) digits, and (d) whitespaces. It runs the algorithm with these sequences as leaves, and at the end of the algorithm tries some basic regex expansions on these sequences (i.e., trying to expand a sequence of numbers with "all integers" or "all sequences of digits). For many realistic input formats, this results in better runtime and more consistent performance. However, if your input format is non human-readable, the distinction between these character classes may not be relevant to the input format. See `text-paren-example` for a simple pathological example.  

Arvada provides the `--no-pretokenize` flag to disable this pretokenization and expansion stage, and treat each character as a leaf node. Conversely, the `--group_punctuation` flag also groups ascii punctuation characters during pretokenization, and the `--group_upper_lower` flag groups together letters regardless of their case. 
